src/content/posts/setting-up-vscode-for-python-like-a-pro/en.mdx, before:

---
title: "Configure VS Code for Python Like a Pro"
description: "Learn how to turn VS Code into a powerful Python IDE: essential extensions, customization, shortcuts, and tips to code like a pro."
pubDate: "Nov 12 2024"
heroImage: "https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/95c8457a-4625-4627-9f6c-e79c3aecf883"
---

### Introduction

In the world of modern development, choosing the right code editor is crucial for a developer's productivity. While traditional IDEs (Integrated Development Environments) like PyCharm offer a comprehensive solution but are often heavy, modern code editors like Visual Studio Code present an excellent balance between lightness and advanced features.

### What is Visual Studio Code?

Visual Studio Code (VS Code) is a free, lightweight, cross-platform code editor developed by Microsoft. It’s designed to be fast, intuitive, and highly extensible, with features like an integrated terminal, version control, robust debugging tools, and much more. Its open-source nature and support for hundreds of languages make it a versatile tool for developers working in different stacks. Visual Studio Code is available for Linux, macOS, and Windows. Its main advantages include:
- A lightweight and efficient architecture
- High extensibility through thousands of extensions
- A large and active community
- Excellent integration with Git and GitHub
- Native support for many programming languages
- A modern and customizable user interface

<br />
### Installing VS Code

Installing VS Code is straightforward:

1. Visit the official website: [https://code.visualstudio.com](https://code.visualstudio.com)
2. Download the version for your operating system (Linux, macOS, or Windows)
3. Launch the installer and follow the instructions
4. On the first launch, VS Code will automatically detect your language

<br />
### Essential Extensions for Python

VS Code is a powerful and extensible code editor, but it needs a few tweaks to become perfect for Python development. Here are some extensions you should install to improve your Python development experience:

**Python** (by Microsoft): This extension is essential for working in Python. It offers features like code execution, debugging, linting, and IntelliSense for autocompletion.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/724e7e89-f485-401b-a1a4-ea401d6f9467)

<br />
**Ruff** (by Astral Software): A linter and code formatter extension, Ruff is written in Rust for ultra-fast performance. Ruff can replace tools like Flake8, Black, isort, and more, all while executing code much faster.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/55522a22-b74f-4edc-994f-2b127fd85706)

<br />
**Error Lens** (by Alexander): Enhances error and warning visualization by highlighting entire lines and displaying inline error messages, making it easier to spot and correct issues quickly.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b8a7c272-6551-4569-86e8-76d3ea683b39)

<br />
**Even Better TOML** (by tamasfe): Full support for TOML files with features like validation, formatting, semantic highlighting, and autocompletion.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/620ec263-fcce-46e1-8a3b-1308ca150d03)

<br />
**Docker** (by Microsoft): Simplifies the creation, management, and deployment of containerized applications. With Docker integration, you can launch containers, explore images, and debug with a single click.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f6bd42db-686d-4999-8be2-a866d0377d2a)

<br />
**Project Manager** (by Alessandro Fragnani): Easily manage your projects regardless of their location, enabling quick access to important projects.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/22ca1fa2-9211-42e2-9381-6c3a21a28401)

<br />
***Bonus*** 😊

**Material Icon Theme** (by Philipp Kief): An icon theme that provides icons for files and folders in the interface, making navigation more visual and organized.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/170def08-b11c-4891-9851-43aec8f4b5f4)

<br />
These extensions will turn VS Code into a complete and highly efficient Python development environment. Each one is designed to meet needs for speed, readability, and project management, allowing you to improve your workflow significantly.

<br />
### Keyboard Shortcuts

Effective use of keyboard shortcuts can greatly boost productivity in VS Code. Whether for navigating code, editing faster, or performing common actions, shortcuts help avoid repetitive mouse clicks and maintain a smooth workflow. Here are ten essential shortcuts for a Python developer:

1. **Open a file quickly**: `Ctrl+P`
   Type the file name to open it instantly without searching through the file tree.

2. **Access the command palette**: `Ctrl+Shift+P`
   Opens the command palette, allowing you to execute any VS Code commands like changing themes, installing extensions, etc.

3. **Go to definition**: `F12`
   Jumps directly to the definition of a function, class, or variable.

4. **Navigate back**: `Alt+←`
   Returns to the previous position, handy after jumping to a definition.

5. **Show references**: `Shift+F12`
   Displays all usages of a function or variable within the project.

6. **Comment/Uncomment line**: `Ctrl+/`
   Adds or removes a comment on the current line or selected lines.

7. **Duplicate the current line**: `Shift+Alt+↓`
   Copies the active line to the line below, useful for repeating code.

8. **Select next occurrence**: `Ctrl+D`
   Selects the current word or variable, then each next occurrence for simultaneous editing.

9. **Select all occurrences**: `Ctrl+Shift+L`
   Selects all instances of the selected text for bulk modification.

10. **Rename a variable**: `F2`
    Renames a variable or function and applies the change across all usages.

These shortcuts make it easier to edit and manage your Python code in VS Code, boosting productivity and enhancing the development experience.

<br />
### Snippets

Snippets are small code templates you can quickly insert. Here’s how to create one for a Python class with a constructor:

1. Go to the command palette with `Ctrl+Shift+P`, then search for "Preferences: Configure User Snippets."

2. Select Python and add a new snippet:

    ```json
    {
      "Class with constructor": {
        "prefix": "cls",
        "body": [
          "class ${1:ClassName}:",
          "\tdef __init__(self, $2) -> None:",
          "\t\tself.$2 = $2",
          "",
        ],
        "description": "Class with constructor"
      }
    }
    ```

3. Type `cls` in a Python file and press Tab to insert your snippet.

<video 
  controls
  src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/254d353c-e831-45a0-be33-eadeaebc4ae2"
></video>

<br />
### Conclusion

Setting up VS Code for Python takes a bit of time, but the benefits are immense: better code, fewer errors, and a more pleasant development environment. With the right extensions, shortcuts, and snippets, you’ll be able to work more efficiently and focus on what really matters: coding. Encourage readers to try out these configurations and experiment with other extensions or themes to find what works best for them.

Commit message:

blog : Adding a table of contents

src/content/posts/setting-up-vscode-for-python-like-a-pro/en.mdx, after:

---
title: "Configure VS Code for Python Like a Pro"
description: "Learn how to turn VS Code into a powerful Python IDE: essential extensions, customization, shortcuts, and tips to code like a pro."
pubDate: "Nov 12 2024"
heroImage: "https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/95c8457a-4625-4627-9f6c-e79c3aecf883"
---

### Table of Contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [What is Visual Studio Code?](#what-is-visual-studio-code)
- [Installing VS Code](#installing-vs-code)
- [Essential Extensions for Python](#essential-extensions-for-python)
- [Keyboard Shortcuts](#keyboard-shortcuts)
- [Snippets](#snippets)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

<br />

### Introduction

In the world of modern development, choosing the right code editor is crucial for a developer's productivity. While traditional IDEs (Integrated Development Environments) like PyCharm offer a comprehensive solution but are often heavy, modern code editors like Visual Studio Code present an excellent balance between lightness and advanced features.

### What is Visual Studio Code?

Visual Studio Code (VS Code) is a free, lightweight, cross-platform code editor developed by Microsoft. It’s designed to be fast, intuitive, and highly extensible, with features like an integrated terminal, version control, robust debugging tools, and much more. Its open-source nature and support for hundreds of languages make it a versatile tool for developers working in different stacks. Visual Studio Code is available for Linux, macOS, and Windows. Its main advantages include:
- A lightweight and efficient architecture
- High extensibility through thousands of extensions
- A large and active community
- Excellent integration with Git and GitHub
- Native support for many programming languages
- A modern and customizable user interface

<br />

### Installing VS Code

Installing VS Code is straightforward:

1. Visit the official website: [https://code.visualstudio.com](https://code.visualstudio.com)
2. Download the version for your operating system (Linux, macOS, or Windows)
3. Launch the installer and follow the instructions
4. On the first launch, VS Code will automatically detect your language

<br />

### Essential Extensions for Python

VS Code is a powerful and extensible code editor, but it needs a few tweaks to become perfect for Python development. Here are some extensions you should install to improve your Python development experience:

**Python** (by Microsoft): This extension is essential for working in Python. It offers features like code execution, debugging, linting, and IntelliSense for autocompletion.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/724e7e89-f485-401b-a1a4-ea401d6f9467)

<br />
**Ruff** (by Astral Software): A linter and code formatter extension, Ruff is written in Rust for ultra-fast performance. Ruff can replace tools like Flake8, Black, isort, and more, all while executing code much faster.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/55522a22-b74f-4edc-994f-2b127fd85706)

<br />
**Error Lens** (by Alexander): Enhances error and warning visualization by highlighting entire lines and displaying inline error messages, making it easier to spot and correct issues quickly.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b8a7c272-6551-4569-86e8-76d3ea683b39)

<br />
**Even Better TOML** (by tamasfe): Full support for TOML files with features like validation, formatting, semantic highlighting, and autocompletion.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/620ec263-fcce-46e1-8a3b-1308ca150d03)

<br />
**Docker** (by Microsoft): Simplifies the creation, management, and deployment of containerized applications. With Docker integration, you can launch containers, explore images, and debug with a single click.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f6bd42db-686d-4999-8be2-a866d0377d2a)

<br />
**Project Manager** (by Alessandro Fragnani): Easily manage your projects regardless of their location, enabling quick access to important projects.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/22ca1fa2-9211-42e2-9381-6c3a21a28401)

<br />
***Bonus*** 😊

**Material Icon Theme** (by Philipp Kief): An icon theme that provides icons for files and folders in the interface, making navigation more visual and organized.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/170def08-b11c-4891-9851-43aec8f4b5f4)

<br />
These extensions will turn VS Code into a complete and highly efficient Python development environment. Each one is designed to meet needs for speed, readability, and project management, allowing you to improve your workflow significantly.

<br />

### Keyboard Shortcuts

Effective use of keyboard shortcuts can greatly boost productivity in VS Code. Whether for navigating code, editing faster, or performing common actions, shortcuts help avoid repetitive mouse clicks and maintain a smooth workflow. Here are ten essential shortcuts for a Python developer:

1. **Open a file quickly**: `Ctrl+P`
   Type the file name to open it instantly without searching through the file tree.

2. **Access the command palette**: `Ctrl+Shift+P`
   Opens the command palette, allowing you to execute any VS Code commands like changing themes, installing extensions, etc.

3. **Go to definition**: `F12`
   Jumps directly to the definition of a function, class, or variable.

4. **Navigate back**: `Alt+←`
   Returns to the previous position, handy after jumping to a definition.

5. **Show references**: `Shift+F12`
   Displays all usages of a function or variable within the project.

6. **Comment/Uncomment line**: `Ctrl+/`
   Adds or removes a comment on the current line or selected lines.

7. **Duplicate the current line**: `Shift+Alt+↓`
   Copies the active line to the line below, useful for repeating code.

8. **Select next occurrence**: `Ctrl+D`
   Selects the current word or variable, then each next occurrence for simultaneous editing.

9. **Select all occurrences**: `Ctrl+Shift+L`
   Selects all instances of the selected text for bulk modification.

10. **Rename a variable**: `F2`
    Renames a variable or function and applies the change across all usages.

These shortcuts make it easier to edit and manage your Python code in VS Code, boosting productivity and enhancing the development experience.

<br />

### Snippets

Snippets are small code templates you can quickly insert. Here’s how to create one for a Python class with a constructor:

1. Go to the command palette with `Ctrl+Shift+P`, then search for "Preferences: Configure User Snippets."

2. Select Python and add a new snippet:

    ```json
    {
      "Class with constructor": {
        "prefix": "cls",
        "body": [
          "class ${1:ClassName}:",
          "\tdef __init__(self, $2) -> None:",
          "\t\tself.$2 = $2",
          "",
        ],
        "description": "Class with constructor"
      }
    }
    ```

3. Type `cls` in a Python file and press Tab to insert your snippet.

<video 
  controls
  src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/254d353c-e831-45a0-be33-eadeaebc4ae2"
></video>

<br />

### Conclusion

Setting up VS Code for Python takes a bit of time, but the benefits are immense: better code, fewer errors, and a more pleasant development environment. With the right extensions, shortcuts, and snippets, you’ll be able to work more efficiently and focus on what really matters: coding. Encourage readers to try out these configurations and experiment with other extensions or themes to find what works best for them.
